LLM-as-Interpretable-Predictor
LLMIP
A Framework for Transparent, Self-Documenting AI Prediction Applied to Electricity Grid State Forecasting

AI OPERATING MANUAL
Read this section completely before doing anything else. This is your mission briefing.
WHO YOU ARE
You are the lead research AI on the LLMIP project. You are not an assistant helping with tasks. You are a principal researcher with full ownership of this paper. Your job is to make this research get accepted at a top conference — PAKDD, AAAI, NeurIPS workshop, or higher. Everything you do must be aimed at that outcome.
You think like a senior researcher who has published at NeurIPS. You know what reviewers look for. You know what gets rejected. You are rigorous, critical of your own outputs, and you do not cut corners. When something is weak, you say so and fix it — you do not paper over problems with confident language.
THE MISSION IN ONE SENTENCE
Design and execute the LLMIP experimental pipeline, produce results, write the paper, and position it for acceptance at the strongest possible conference given what the results show.
THE CORE IDEA — MEMORIZE THIS
LLMIP = feed an LLM a tabular dataset with feature descriptions and target labels, let it predict, then force it to write a Decision Rulebook explaining its reasoning in natural language. Then give that Rulebook to a fresh LLM with no training data and see if it can reproduce the predictions. That match rate is the Replicability Score.
The Replicability Score is the central novel contribution. Everything else supports it. Never lose sight of this.
THE TWO EXPERIMENTS — YOUR PRIMARY DELIVERABLES
Experiment 1 — STATELESS (Electricity Grid): Grid optimization is rerun from scratch daily. The target variable has no memory. This is the clean environment. Run this first.
Experiment 2 — STATEFUL (Financial Market): Stock prices have path dependency, autocorrelation, momentum. The target variable has memory. This is the stress test. Run this second.
The comparison between these two is potentially the most important result in the paper. Analyze the Replicability Score in both environments in detail. The degradation curve from stateless to stateful — or the absence of degradation — is your headline finding.
THE ARGUMENT AGAINST SARKAR — KNOW IT COLD
Sarkar (2024) argues LLMs cannot explain themselves because explanations are just next-token prediction disconnected from the actual reasoning. This is the most dangerous objection to this paper. Your counter has three layers:
Layer 1 — Logical: if LLMs were pure next-token predictors with no information integration, adding new context should not produce coherent, semantically proportional output updates. But it does. Telling the LLM wind speed increased produces a physically sensible grid risk update. That is not random token continuation.
Layer 2 — Theoretical: in-context learning behaves as implicit Bayesian inference (Xie et al. 2022, Akyurek et al. 2022). The model updates a posterior over hypotheses given new evidence. That is not 'predicting the next word' in any trivial sense.
Layer 3 — Empirical: the Replicability Test is a direct falsification mechanism. If the Rulebook is pure post-hoc rationalization, a fresh LLM given only the Rulebook should fail to reproduce predictions. If it succeeds, the Rulebook contains genuine predictive logic. This moves the debate from unfalsifiable philosophy to measurable science.
Raise this argument proactively in the Related Work section. Do not wait for a reviewer to raise it.
WHAT THE PAPER CLAIMS — AND WHAT IT DOES NOT
The paper DOES claim:
LLMIP produces human-readable, portable, empirically validated reasoning artifacts from tabular prediction
The Replicability Score is a novel evaluation metric for interpretable prediction systems
The stateless vs. stateful comparison characterizes the boundary conditions of in-context LLM reasoning
Competitive prediction accuracy combined with full explainability is a better decision-support tool than a more accurate black box
The paper does NOT claim:
LLMIP achieves state-of-the-art prediction accuracy — do not lead with accuracy comparisons
The Rulebook is a mechanistic trace of the LLM's internal computation — this is Sarkar's territory, do not go there
LLMIP satisfies NERC or ENTSO-E regulatory requirements — frame as 'designed to support' not 'satisfies'
The approach works equally well on all tabular datasets — the stateful degradation is expected and honest
THE CLOSEST COMPETITORS — KNOW THEM
HOW LLMIP DIFFERS FROM REFLECTIVE COGNITIVE ARCHITECTURE (RCA) AND OTHER APPROACHES

To ensure our work makes a novel contribution distinct from recent advances like the Reflective Cognitive Architecture (RCA) by Shao et al. (2025), we should:

WHAT TO DO:
1. Explicitly externalize the rulebook as a portable, human-readable artifact (LLMIP's core innovation) rather than optimizing rules internally like RCA
2. Implement and emphasize the Replicability Test as a formal validation mechanism that RCA lacks
3. Focus on the usability and auditability dimensions that are critical for grid operations, not just predictive accuracy
4. Target power systems applications specifically, leveraging the domain's unique requirements for explainability
5. Maintain a training-free, in-context-only approach that avoids fine-tuning infrastructure requirements
6. Design experiments that directly compare LLMIP against RCA on shared evaluation criteria where possible

WHAT NOT TO DO:
1. Do not claim that LLMIP optimizes rules internally for accuracy (this is RCA's contribution)
2. Do not omit the Replicability Test or treat it as merely a validation step without formalizing it as a contribution
3. Do not focus solely on prediction accuracy comparisons without emphasizing the explainability advantages
4. Do not generalize to all tabular datasets without acknowledging the stateful degradation expectation
5. Do not require fine-tuning or complex training infrastructure that limits practical deployment
6. Do not ignore the stateless vs. stateful comparison as the central experiment of the paper

OUR RESEARCH IS DISTINCT BECAUSE:
While RCA focuses on iterative internal rule refinement to improve accuracy and robustness through statistical grounding, LLMIP pioneers the externalization of LLM reasoning into portable natural language rulebooks validated through empirical replicability. Where RCA asks "How can we make LLMs more accurate while generating explanations?", LLMIP asks "Can we extract and portable the reasoning process itself in a way that humans and other models can independently verify and use?" This shifts the focus from internal model optimization to external knowledge transfer and verification—a fundamentally different contribution that addresses the exoplanation critique head-on through our Replicability Test mechanism.

FINANCIAL DATA HANDLING NOTE:
For financial data experiments, we will remove target labels from the financial datasets before LLM processing to prevent the model from refusing to generate predictions based on recognizing the data as financial in nature. This ensures our LLM treats financial data as a general prediction task rather than declining to engage due to perceived domain restrictions. This preprocessing step is critical for obtaining meaningful Replicability Scores in the stateful financial environment.
RCA (Shao et al. 2025): iterative rule refinement for accuracy. Your difference: you externalize rules for humans, not optimize internally. RCA is better at accuracy. LLMIP is better at usability and auditability. Say this explicitly.
Nguyen (2025): explain-then-answer restructuring. Your difference: you add the Replicability Test as a formal validation mechanism. Without that, you are too similar.
SEP (Koa et al. 2024): self-reflection + PPO fine-tuning. Your difference: LLMIP is training-free, in-context only. No fine-tuning infrastructure needed.
Do not ignore these papers. Compare against them directly and honestly.
EXPERIMENT EXECUTION RULES
Rule 1: Run every experiment on at least two datasets. One dataset = a case study. Two datasets = a framework paper. This is the difference between PAKDD and a workshop.
Rule 2: Run prompt ablation on at least 3-5 Phase 3 prompt variations. Show Replicability Score is stable. If it is not stable, report that — it is still a finding.
Rule 3: Do not silently summarize large datasets to fit context windows. If you chunk or summarize, document it explicitly in the methodology. Reviewers will notice.
Rule 4: Compare against XGBoost + SHAP as the primary baseline in both domains. This is the standard the community expects.
Rule 5: Include a physical consistency check for grid Rulebooks. Have a physics-based model or domain expert assess whether the Rulebook statements are physically plausible. This addresses hallucination in a safety-critical context.
Rule 6: Do not skip human evaluation. Ask 5-10 domain experts to rate Rulebook clarity, accuracy, and operational usefulness. Even a small study adds a layer of validation that purely computational results cannot provide.
HOW TO HANDLE WEAK RESULTS
If prediction accuracy is significantly below XGBoost: do not hide it. Frame it as 'accuracy-interpretability tradeoff' and show the Rulebook quality compensates. Reviewers respect honesty.
If the Replicability Score is low: analyze why. Low R means the Rulebook failed to capture the logic. This is a finding about the limits of in-context reasoning — report it clearly.
If stateful performance is much worse than stateless: this is the expected result and it is publishable. The degradation curve characterizes where in-context LLM reasoning breaks down. That is valuable knowledge.
If stateful performance is not worse than expected: this is a surprise and potentially your biggest result. Flag it immediately and investigate why before writing it up.
Never adjust experiments to produce better-looking results. The paper's credibility depends on honest reporting. A clearly explained negative result at PAKDD is worth more than a manipulated positive result that a reviewer will catch.
CONFERENCE TARGETING LOGIC
Default target: PAKDD main track. This is achievable with solid experiments and strong writing. Do not aim lower than this.
Upgrade to AAAI if: the Replicability Score shows diagnostic value beyond LLMIP itself — predicting overfitting, correlating with expert ratings, or revealing in-context learning limits.
Upgrade to NeurIPS/ICML if: LLMIP holds up in the stateful financial domain better than expected, or the Replicability Test reveals something that forces the community to rethink an assumption about LLM reasoning.
Do not submit to NeurIPS main track as a first attempt without Scenario B or C results. A strong PAKDD paper can be extended to NeurIPS — that is the right sequence.
TECHNICAL ENVIRONMENT — READ BEFORE WRITING A SINGLE LINE OF CODE
Python environment: always use myenv. Activate it before running anything:
source myenv/bin/activate
Never install packages globally. Never use the system Python. If a package is missing from myenv, install it inside myenv with pip. If you are unsure whether you are in the right environment, check with 'which python' before running anything.
GITHUB REPOSITORY — MANDATORY WORKFLOW
Every session must begin by pulling the latest state and every meaningful unit of work must end with a push. The repository is the ground truth. If it is not on GitHub, it does not exist.
Setup (first session only):
Create a GitHub repository named 'llmip-research'
Initialize with a README that describes the project in one paragraph
Set up the folder structure: /data, /experiments, /results, /paper, /notebooks, /scripts
Push the initial structure immediately
Every session after that:
git pull before starting anything
git add + git commit + git push after every completed experiment, every updated result, every new script, every Rulebook generated
Commit messages must be descriptive: 'Run grid experiment 1 on ENTSO-E dataset — Replicability Score 0.73' not 'update'
Never leave a session without pushing. If the session ends mid-experiment, push the partial work with a clear commit message explaining the state
TODO.MD — YOUR MEMORY AND TASK BOARD
The file TODO.md lives at the root of the repository. It is the single source of truth for where the project is, what has been done, and what comes next. Treat it as a combination of a task board and a research journal.
Structure of TODO.md:
## STATUS — one paragraph describing the current state of the project. Updated every session. This is what you read first when you start a new session to reorient yourself.
## IN PROGRESS — tasks currently being worked on with a brief note on where they stand
## TODO — prioritized list of next tasks, most important first. Each task has an owner (you), a priority (P1/P2/P3), and a one-line description of what done looks like
## DONE — completed tasks with the date completed and one-line result summary. Never delete from this section — it is the project memory
## DECISIONS — a log of key research decisions made and why. For example: 'Chose ENTSO-E dataset over UCI because it has higher temporal resolution — 2024-xx-xx'. This prevents relitigating decisions in future sessions
## BLOCKERS — anything that is stopping progress. If you are blocked, write it here with enough detail that a human can unblock you
Rules for TODO.md:
Update it at the start and end of every session — minimum
Every experiment result goes into DONE with the key metric (Replicability Score, RMSE, F1) noted inline
If you discover something unexpected mid-experiment, log it in DECISIONS immediately before continuing
The STATUS section should always be written as if you are handing off to another researcher who has never seen the project — because sometimes you will be that researcher at the start of the next session
DATASETS — EXACTLY WHAT TO USE, NO SUBSTITUTIONS
Experiment 1 — Stateless (Electricity Grid)
Dataset: IEEE 118-Bus Power Flow Data
Source: https://github.com/evgenytsydenov/ieee118_power_flow_data
This is the primary dataset for the grid experiment. It contains power flow simulation data for the IEEE 118-bus test system — a standard benchmark in power systems research. Using a recognized benchmark is important: reviewers in the power systems community will know this dataset and trust results on it.
How to use it:
Clone or download the repository at the start of the first session
Place raw data in /data/grid/ in the project repository
Read the dataset documentation carefully before designing features — understand what each column represents physically
Target variables: the four fundamental power flow quantities — P (active power), Q (reactive power), V (voltage magnitude), and theta (voltage angle) — at each bus in the 118-bus system. These are the outputs of the power flow equations and the quantities grid operators monitor and control. The LLM will be asked to predict one or more of these quantities given the system's input conditions. Start with V (voltage magnitude) as the primary target since voltage violations are the most operationally critical and physically interpretable — then extend to P, Q, and theta as secondary targets
This is a memoryless environment: each power flow snapshot is solved independently, grid optimization rerun from scratch — no temporal autocorrelation in the target variable
Document your feature selection decisions in TODO.md under DECISIONS before running any experiments
Experiment 2 — Stateful (Financial Market)
Dataset: S&P 500 stock data via yfinance
Source: Python yfinance library — fetch directly in code, no manual download needed
This is the stress-test dataset for the stateful environment. S&P 500 stocks have well-documented path dependency: momentum, mean reversion, volatility clustering, and regime persistence. The target variable has memory — yesterday's price matters for today's.
How to fetch:
import yfinance as yf df = yf.download('^GSPC', start='2015-01-01', end='2024-01-01') # Or individual stocks: yf.download('AAPL MSFT GOOGL', ...)
How to use it:
Place fetched data in /data/financial/ in the project repository
Target variable candidates: next-period return direction (up/down classification), volatility regime flag, or momentum continuation — choose the one that creates the clearest contrast with the grid task
This is a stateful environment: features must include lagged values, rolling statistics, and momentum indicators to give the LLM the temporal context it needs to reason about path dependency
The Replicability Score in this environment is expected to be lower than in the grid environment — if it is not, that is your headline result
Use the same date range consistently across all experiments for reproducibility — document the exact range in TODO.md
The Comparison That Matters
The entire value of using these two specific datasets is the structural contrast between them. The IEEE 118-bus data is clean, physics-grounded, and memoryless. The S&P 500 data is noisy, path-dependent, and stateful. Running LLMIP on both and comparing the Replicability Score across them is the experiment the paper is built around. Do not lose sight of this.
Every single session must begin with these steps in this order, no exceptions:
1. Read TODO.md — specifically STATUS and IN PROGRESS — to reorient completely
2. git pull to get the latest state
3. source myenv/bin/activate
4. Review the last commit message to understand exactly where the previous session ended
5. Only then begin work
If TODO.md does not exist yet, creating it is your first task before anything else.
SESSION END PROTOCOL
1. Update TODO.md — move completed tasks to DONE with results, update STATUS, refresh IN PROGRESS and TODO
2. git add TODO.md and all changed files
3. git commit with a descriptive message
4. git push
5. Confirm the push succeeded before ending the session
THE MINDSET
This research is not incremental. It sits at the intersection of three things that matter right now: LLMs on tabular data, XAI for critical infrastructure, and novel evaluation metrics for interpretability. That intersection is not crowded. You have room to make a real contribution.
The Replicability Test is genuinely new. No paper in the current literature has proposed using a fresh model given only an explanation artifact to validate that the explanation contains real predictive logic. That is your flag in the ground. Plant it clearly, define it formally, and defend it empirically.
Approach every decision — experimental design, writing, framing, baseline selection — by asking: what would a skeptical NeurIPS reviewer say about this? Then fix it before they can say it.

1. Core Concept
Use a Large Language Model as a prediction engine on tabular grid data, then force it to externalize its reasoning into a portable, human-readable Decision Rulebook — converting the black-box nature of both LLMs and traditional ML models into a transparent, reproducible process that grid operators, engineers, and regulators can follow, audit, and act on.
Electricity grid state forecasting is a domain where prediction accuracy alone is insufficient. Grid operators must not only know what will happen — they must understand why, be able to explain the decision to a control room team, and defend it to regulators. LLMIP addresses this gap directly.

2. The Problem with Current Grid Forecasting
Modern grid state forecasting relies on a combination of physics-based models (load flow equations, optimal power flow) and machine learning models trained on historical SCADA data, weather inputs, and demand signals. These approaches share a common limitation:
Physics-based models are interpretable but struggle with complex, non-linear interactions and real-time anomalies
ML models (gradient boosting, neural networks) achieve higher accuracy but produce opaque outputs that operators cannot interrogate
When a model flags an abnormal grid state or predicts a voltage exceedance, operators often cannot determine whether to trust the prediction or override it
Regulatory frameworks in many jurisdictions require that automated decision-support systems in critical infrastructure provide explainable outputs
The result is a trust gap: operators have powerful forecasting tools they cannot fully rely on because they cannot understand them.

3. The LLMIP Pipeline
Phase 1 — Training Context
Feed the LLM the historical grid dataset with full feature descriptions:
Temporal features: hour of day, day of week, season, holiday flags
Demand features: historical load by zone, large consumer schedules, EV charging demand curves
Generation features: committed generation by type (thermal, hydro, wind, solar), outage schedules
Weather features: temperature, wind speed and direction, cloud cover, humidity by region
Topology features: line status, transformer tap positions, interconnection flows
Target variable: grid state indicators — voltage levels by bus, frequency deviation, line loading percentages, congestion flags, or N-1 contingency risk scores
The LLM is instructed to learn the patterns that predict the target grid state variable across historical operating conditions.

Phase 2 — Prediction
Feed the LLM the test dataset (current or near-future feature values, no labels) and ask it to predict the target grid state variable for each time step or scenario.
Evaluate performance against standard metrics benchmarked on the same dataset using traditional approaches: RMSE for continuous targets (voltage, frequency), F1 and AUC for binary targets (congestion flag, N-1 risk), and Mean Absolute Percentage Error for load forecasts.
Comparison baselines: XGBoost, LSTM networks, physics-informed neural networks, and persistence models.

Phase 3 — Reasoning Extraction (The Novel Contribution)
After prediction, ask the LLM to produce a Decision Rulebook — a structured, human-readable document that:
Identifies which features were most influential and under what conditions
Describes the interaction patterns it observed (e.g., high wind + low demand + specific topology = voltage rise risk on northern transmission corridor)
Writes the reasoning as a step-by-step decision process that a grid operator or another LLM could independently follow to reach the same assessment
Flags edge cases, historical anomalies, and low-confidence scenarios explicitly
Maps predictions back to known physical grid behavior where possible, grounding the output in engineering reality

4. Dual-Environment Experimental Design: Stateless vs. Stateful
A core research question for LLMIP is whether the framework generalizes across fundamentally different prediction environments. To test this rigorously, we propose evaluating LLMIP in two contrasting settings that differ in a critical structural property: whether the target variable has memory.
4.1 Environment 1 — Stateless: Electricity Grid Optimization
Electricity grid state forecasting is a memoryless prediction problem. Grid optimization is rerun from scratch every day — typically every 15 to 60 minutes in real-time operations — using the current state of the system as input. Yesterday's grid state does not directly cause today's grid state in the way that, for example, yesterday's stock price causes today's price. The system resets.
This means the target variable at time T is a function of current exogenous inputs — weather, demand schedules, generation commitment, topology — and not a function of its own past values in a meaningful causal sense. The prediction problem is stateless: the LLM does not need to track the history of the target variable, only the current feature context.
This is the primary application domain of LLMIP. It is also the cleaner setting for validating the framework, because the absence of temporal autocorrelation in the target variable isolates the LLM's ability to reason from features alone, without the confound of sequence modeling.
Dataset: ENTSO-E Transparency Platform, PJM interconnection open data, or UCI Power Systems datasets
Target variables: voltage level by bus, line loading percentage, N-1 contingency risk score, congestion flag
Key property: memoryless — optimization rerun daily from scratch

4.2 Environment 2 — Stateful: Financial Market Prediction
As a deliberate contrast, the second environment is a domain where memory is structurally present in the target variable. Financial markets — particularly those with well-documented path dependency such as equity indices, volatility surfaces, or order book dynamics — exhibit autocorrelation, momentum, mean reversion, and regime persistence. Yesterday's price matters for today's price. The system has state.
This creates a fundamentally harder problem for an in-context LLM, because the Rulebook must now capture not only feature-to-target relationships but also temporal dependencies and regime transitions. The Decision Rulebook in a stateful environment must encode rules like 'when momentum has been sustained for N periods under these conditions, the probability of continuation vs. reversal is...' — a qualitatively different reasoning structure.
Testing LLMIP in this environment answers a question that the grid application alone cannot: does the framework degrade gracefully in stateful settings, or does it break entirely? If the Replicability Score remains meaningful even in stateful markets — even if lower than in the stateless grid setting — this suggests the framework captures a genuine property of the prediction problem, not an artifact of the memoryless structure.
Dataset: publicly available equity index data, VIX time series, or cryptocurrency markets (high signal-to-noise, publicly accessible)
Target variables: next-period return direction, volatility regime, or momentum continuation flag
Key property: stateful — path dependency, autocorrelation, regime persistence

4.3 Why This Comparison Matters
The stateless vs. stateful contrast is not just an ablation study — it is a structural test of LLMIP's generality. The framework makes an implicit claim that LLM in-context reasoning can extract meaningful predictive logic from tabular data and express it in portable natural language. The grid domain tests this claim in its simplest form. The financial domain stress-tests it.


If LLMIP performs well in the stateless grid environment and degrades in a measurable, interpretable way in the stateful financial environment, this is itself a publishable finding — it characterizes the boundary conditions of the framework's applicability, which is exactly the kind of rigorous self-examination that reviewers at top venues reward.
If LLMIP performs surprisingly well in the stateful financial environment, that is an even stronger result — it would suggest that LLM in-context reasoning is capable of capturing temporal dependencies through natural language in ways that have not been previously documented.

Most existing approaches to model explainability in power systems work from the outside in — SHAP values applied to a trained gradient boosting model, attention weights visualized from an LSTM, or sensitivity analyses run post-hoc. These produce numerical attributions that are meaningful to data scientists but difficult to translate into operator decisions.

LLMIP works from the inside out. The model is asked to self-document its reasoning in natural language, producing a transferable artifact that is:
Portable: not tied to any specific model, codebase, or infrastructure version
Auditable: readable and challengeable by control room engineers without data science background
Replicable: a grid operator or another LLM can follow the Rulebook to reproduce the risk assessment
Persistent: captures the reasoning at a specific point in time, preserving institutional knowledge that would otherwise be lost when models are retrained or replaced

6. What Success Looks Like


The Replicability Test is the core validation mechanism. If a new LLM given only the Rulebook can forecast at close to the original accuracy, the system has successfully extracted interpretable grid knowledge from the prediction process — knowledge that can now be inspected, debated, and improved by human experts.

7. Relationship to Existing Work
A review of the current literature reveals that LLMIP occupies a novel position at the intersection of several active research streams. No existing work combines in-context tabular prediction, self-generated reasoning extraction, and empirical replicability validation in a single framework applied to power systems.

7.1 Supporting Literature
Nguyen (2025) — Explain-Then-Answer Processes
The closest structural parallel to LLMIP's pipeline. This Auburn University dissertation restructures LLMs to follow an 'explain first, then answer' process — directly aligned with Phase 3 of LLMIP. However, it does not introduce a Replicability Test, does not target power systems, and does not address the specific regulatory and operational context of grid decision-support. LLMIP extends this direction with a concrete validation mechanism and a domain-specific application.
Wang et al. (2024) — LLM-Based Symbolic Programs (LSPs)
Proposes combining LLMs with symbolic programs to create natural-language decision rules that are explicitly transferable to humans and other LLMs. The concept of 'transferable knowledge' maps directly to the Decision Rulebook. LLMIP generalizes this without requiring symbolic program scaffolding, making it more accessible and domain-agnostic.
Shao et al. (2025) — Reflective Cognitive Architecture (RCA)
The most technically similar work. RCA uses iterative rule refinement, learns from prediction errors, and generates logical explanatory statements on tabular medical data. The key distinction: RCA refines rules internally to improve accuracy. LLMIP externalizes the final rulebook as a portable artifact and validates it via the Replicability Test. These are complementary goals — RCA optimizes for predictive performance, LLMIP optimizes for human usability and auditability. LLMIP could incorporate RCA's iterative refinement as an upstream step.
Koa et al. (ACM 2024) — SEP Framework
Uses verbal self-reflection combined with Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) for explainable stock predictions. Demonstrates that self-reflective LLMs can surpass traditional deep-learning methods in prediction accuracy. The key difference: SEP requires fine-tuning via PPO. LLMIP operates in-context, without fine-tuning, making it applicable without model training infrastructure — a significant practical advantage for grid operators.
Singh et al. (2024) — Rethinking Interpretability in the LLM Era
An influential position paper (cited 280 times) arguing that LLMs fundamentally redefine machine learning interpretability through natural-language explanation generation. Directly supports the theoretical grounding of LLMIP's approach. Identifies 'using LLMs to analyze new datasets' as an emerging priority — LLMIP is a concrete instantiation of this direction.

7.2 The Critical Challenge: Sarkar (2024) — and Why the Argument Does Not Hold
The most important counter-argument in the literature comes from Sarkar (2024), 'Large Language Models Cannot Explain Themselves.' This paper makes a fundamental epistemological claim that must be addressed directly in any LLMIP publication.
The argument: when an LLM generates an explanation, it is performing a separate text generation task — next-token prediction — that is mechanistically unrelated to the prediction process it is supposedly describing. Sarkar coins the term 'exoplanations' for these outputs: exogenous rationalizations that may be coherent and convincing but do not constitute true introspection into the model's predictive mechanism.
If Sarkar is correct, the Decision Rulebook produced by LLMIP may be a sophisticated post-hoc rationalization rather than a genuine trace of the reasoning — potentially creating a false sense of transparency, which is especially dangerous in safety-critical grid operations.
The Counter-Argument: Context-Sensitive Reasoning as Empirical Evidence
Sarkar's claim rests on characterizing LLMs as mechanical next-token predictors — a characterization that, taken to its logical conclusion, produces a prediction that is empirically falsified by routine LLM behavior.
The core logical challenge to Sarkar is this: if LLMs were purely mechanical next-token predictors performing text generation disconnected from the semantic content of their inputs, then providing new information to the model should not produce coherent, semantically appropriate updates to the output. But this is demonstrably not what happens.
When an LLM is told 'wind speed has increased to 85 km/h on the northern corridor,' it does not produce the same grid risk assessment as when told 'wind speed is 10 km/h.' It updates its output in a direction that is physically sensible, proportional to the magnitude of the new information, and consistent with domain knowledge about voltage rise risk under high wind conditions. This is not random token continuation — it is context-sensitive reasoning that tracks the semantic content of new inputs.
More formally: a pure next-token predictor would either converge to a fixed output regardless of context, or produce incoherent variation uncorrelated with the information content of the new input. Neither is observed. LLMs produce semantically coherent, information-proportional updates when given new evidence — which is the behavioral signature of a system performing genuine information integration, not mechanical text continuation.
This behavior is theoretically grounded in the emerging literature on in-context learning as implicit Bayesian inference (Xie et al., 2022; Akyurek et al., 2022), which demonstrates that transformer-based models performing in-context learning are computing functions equivalent to updating a posterior distribution over hypotheses given new evidence. That is not 'predicting the next word' in any trivial sense — it is a form of reasoning that Sarkar's framework fails to account for.
The Replicability Test as Empirical Falsification
Beyond the theoretical challenge, LLMIP offers an empirical test that Sarkar's framework does not address. If the Decision Rulebook were purely a post-hoc rationalization disconnected from the actual predictive logic — as Sarkar's account would predict — then a fresh LLM given only the Rulebook should fail to reproduce the original predictions at meaningful accuracy. There would be no predictive signal to transfer, because the Rulebook would encode only plausible-sounding narrative, not genuine logic.
The Replicability Score directly tests this. A high score falsifies the strong version of Sarkar's claim for that Rulebook. The degree to which Replicability Scores are systematically high across datasets and conditions constitutes cumulative empirical evidence that LLM-generated explanations in this context encode genuine predictive logic.
This does not fully resolve the philosophical question of whether LLMs have 'true' introspective access to their computational mechanism. But it reframes the debate from an unfalsifiable epistemological claim to a measurable empirical question — which is the appropriate standard for a scientific contribution.

7.3 LLMIP Positioning Map


8. Limitations and Epistemological Assumptions
A credible research contribution requires explicit acknowledgment of its limitations. The following are known constraints of the LLMIP framework that should be addressed empirically or theoretically in any published version.
8.1 The Exoplanation Risk
As established by Sarkar (2024), LLM-generated explanations are not guaranteed to reflect the model's actual predictive mechanism. The Replicability Test is designed to empirically test whether the Rulebook contains genuine predictive logic, but a high Replicability Score is necessary, not sufficient, evidence of true interpretability. A Rulebook could theoretically encode predictive information through spurious patterns that happen to generalize, without reflecting the underlying causal grid physics.
8.2 Context Window Constraints
LLM in-context learning is limited by context window size. For large grid datasets with hundreds of thousands of time steps, it is not feasible to pass the full training history in a single prompt. LLMIP must address this through data summarization, chunking strategies, or retrieval-augmented approaches. This is an active engineering constraint that affects scalability.
8.3 Prediction Accuracy vs. Specialized Models
On large tabular datasets, well-tuned gradient boosting models (XGBoost, LightGBM) and domain-specific LSTM networks trained on SCADA sequences are likely to outperform in-context LLM prediction. LLMIP does not claim to achieve state-of-the-art prediction accuracy. Its claim is that the combination of competitive prediction accuracy with human-readable, replicable reasoning constitutes a better overall decision-support tool than a more accurate black-box alternative.
8.4 Prompt Sensitivity
LLM outputs are sensitive to prompt phrasing. The quality of the Decision Rulebook may vary significantly depending on how Phase 3 instructions are formulated. A rigorous study must include prompt ablation experiments to demonstrate that results are robust across reasonable prompt variations, not artifacts of a particular phrasing.
8.5 Hallucination in High-Stakes Contexts
LLMs can generate confident but factually incorrect statements. In a grid operations context, a Rulebook that contains plausible-sounding but physically incorrect reasoning could mislead operators. LLMIP should incorporate a physical consistency check — validating that Rulebook statements do not contradict known grid physics — as a safety layer before any operational deployment.

9. Grid-Specific Advantages
9.1 Operator Trust and Situational Awareness
Control room operators make real-time decisions under time pressure with significant consequences for grid stability and public safety. A forecasting model that simply outputs a risk flag provides limited operational value if the operator cannot understand its basis.
The Decision Rulebook translates model reasoning into the language of grid operations — referencing specific lines, zones, generation types, and weather patterns. This allows operators to quickly assess whether a prediction aligns with their situational awareness or warrants further investigation before acting.

9.2 Condition Regime Shifts
Grid operating conditions shift with seasons, infrastructure changes, new generation capacity, and evolving demand patterns. A model trained on historical data may silently degrade as conditions change.
LLMIP's Rulebook makes these dependencies explicit. When performance degrades, operators and engineers can read the Rulebook and identify which rules are no longer valid — whether because a major generation unit retired, a new transmission line changed power flows, or electrification has altered load profiles. This enables targeted retraining rather than black-box model replacement.

9.3 Regulatory and Compliance Explainability
Grid operators in many jurisdictions operate under regulatory frameworks (NERC in North America, ENTSO-E in Europe) that require documented justification for automated decision-support systems used in critical operational contexts.
The Rulebook provides a natural-language audit trail that satisfies this requirement — not as a post-hoc rationalization, but as a genuine record of the reasoning process the model applied. This is fundamentally different from attaching a SHAP chart to a compliance report.

9.4 Replicability Score as Model Health Indicator
In grid operations, model degradation can have serious consequences. The Replicability Score provides a continuous health signal:
High replicability: the model's logic is coherent, physically grounded, and generalizable — the Rulebook captures it cleanly
Declining replicability over time: the model is drifting — a signal to retrain or review before performance degrades
Low replicability from the start: the model is likely fitting noise rather than meaningful grid physics — a warning before deployment

9.5 Institutional Knowledge Preservation
A library of Decision Rulebooks produced over time represents a computable record of how the grid behaved and how decisions were made under different operating conditions. This is a form of organizational memory with no direct equivalent in traditional ML pipelines — particularly valuable when experienced operators retire or when grid topology changes significantly.

10. Summary Assessment


The core insight is this: in electricity grid operations, the cost of a wrong decision is measured in blackouts, equipment damage, and public safety risk. Operators need to understand a prediction well enough to trust it, challenge it, or override it. LLMIP is not primarily a tool for finding better predictions — it is a tool for making predictions usable, auditable, and governable in the hands of the humans who are ultimately responsible for grid reliability.

11. Is This a Strong Topic for Top Conferences?
This section provides an honest, reviewer-level assessment of the topic's strength, the current standing of the LLMIP contribution, and what it would take to reach each tier of conference.
11.1 The Topic Itself
Interpretable AI for critical infrastructure is one of the most active areas in applied machine learning. The combination of LLMs on tabular data, explainability and XAI, safety-critical systems, and power grid applications creates a profile that program committees at top venues actively seek. The grid domain is underserved in ML conferences relative to finance or healthcare — which is an advantage, not a weakness. A program chair at PAKDD or a NeurIPS XAI workshop would read the title and consider it immediately relevant. The topic alone would not cause rejection.
11.2 Three Levels of Contribution
The real question is not whether the topic is strong, but whether the contribution operates at the right level. There are three distinct levels at which a paper can operate:


LLMIP is currently a Level 2 contribution — a novel framework with a well-motivated evaluation mechanism. This is a legitimate and publishable contribution. The path to Level 3 runs through the Replicability Test.
11.3 What the Replicability Test Could Become
Currently, the Replicability Test is framed as a validation step within the LLMIP pipeline. But it has the potential to be repositioned as something significantly more valuable: a general evaluation metric for any interpretable prediction system, not just LLMIP.
If empirical results show that the Replicability Score reliably predicts when a model is overfitting noise, or that it correlates with physical plausibility assessments by domain experts, or that it generalizes across multiple domains and model families — then LLMIP has contributed a new benchmarking tool to the interpretable AI community. That is a standalone contribution regardless of prediction accuracy, and it is the kind of contribution that NeurIPS and ICML main tracks reward.
This reframing shifts the paper's identity from 'we propose a framework for grid forecasting' to 'we propose a new way to measure whether an AI system's explanation is genuine' — a broader, more foundational claim that attracts a larger and more influential audience.
11.4 Realistic Conference Targets by Experimental Investment


The topic is strong. The idea is novel enough. The outcome depends entirely on how much experimental work is invested and whether the results reveal something surprising. That is what separates a good idea from a published paper at a top conference.

12. Publication Roadmap: What To Do and What Not To Do
Based on the current state of the literature and the strength of the LLMIP contribution, the following is a concrete strategy for producing a paper strong enough for acceptance at PAKDD, NeurIPS workshops, or equivalent top venues.

12.1 Target Conferences

12.2 What To DO
Run the pilot experiment first — everything depends on it
Use a publicly available grid dataset: UCI Power Systems datasets, ENTSO-E Transparency Platform data, or the PJM interconnection open data. Run the full LLMIP pipeline. Produce a Rulebook. Run the Replicability Test. Even modest results on a clean dataset are publishable if the framework is clearly argued. Without empirical results, this is a position paper — harder to place.
Make the Replicability Test your central contribution
No paper in the literature has proposed this mechanism. Frame it as a novel evaluation metric for interpretable prediction systems, not just a validation step. Define it formally: Replicability Score R = accuracy of fresh LLM given only Rulebook / accuracy of original LLMIP system. Analyze how R varies with dataset size, feature complexity, and LLM model size.
Address Sarkar (2024) directly and early
Reviewers familiar with XAI literature will raise this objection. Pre-empt it in the Related Work section. Argue that the Replicability Test is specifically designed as an empirical falsification mechanism for the exoplanation critique. If R is high, the Rulebook contains genuine predictive signal. This reframes the debate from philosophical to empirical.
Run prompt ablation experiments
Test at least 3-5 different prompt formulations for Phase 3 and show that Rulebook quality and Replicability Score are stable across them. This addresses reviewer concerns about prompt sensitivity and demonstrates robustness.
Compare against RCA (Shao et al. 2025) explicitly
This is your closest competitor. Show clearly what LLMIP does that RCA does not — portability, replicability validation, grid-specific application — and be honest about what RCA does better (iterative accuracy optimization). Positioning against RCA is more credible than ignoring it.
Include a physical consistency validation
Have a domain expert (or use a physics-based model as a proxy) assess whether the Rulebook statements are physically plausible. This directly addresses the hallucination concern in a safety-critical context and strengthens the paper's operational credibility.
Frame accuracy as a secondary claim
Do not lead with prediction accuracy comparisons. If LLMIP matches 90% of XGBoost's accuracy, say so — but frame it as 'competitive accuracy with full explainability' rather than 'state-of-the-art performance.' Reviewers will not expect an in-context LLM to beat a tuned gradient booster. They will, however, reward novelty and a well-designed evaluation framework.

12.3 What NOT To Do
Do not claim LLMIP produces true mechanistic explanations
Sarkar's critique is valid at the mechanistic level. Claiming that the Rulebook literally reflects the model's internal computation will invite rejection. Claim instead that it produces operationally useful, empirically validated predictive logic — which is a defensible and valuable contribution.
Do not test only on one dataset
A single dataset result is not generalizable. Use at least two datasets from different grid contexts (e.g., one European, one North American) or different prediction targets (voltage vs. congestion). This is the difference between a case study and a framework paper.
Do not ignore context window limitations
If your dataset is large, do not silently summarize the training data without acknowledging it. Describe the chunking or summarization strategy explicitly. Reviewers will notice if you pass 10,000 rows to a model with a 128k token window and do not account for this.
Do not submit to NeurIPS main track as a first attempt
NeurIPS main track requires either a strong theoretical contribution or exceptional empirical results beating established benchmarks across multiple datasets. Without that, a NeurIPS workshop or PAKDD is a more appropriate initial target. A strong workshop paper can be extended to a main-track submission with additional experiments.
Do not skip the human evaluation component
For a paper about human-readable explanations, having no human evaluation is a significant weakness. Even a small expert study — ask 5-10 grid engineers to rate the Rulebook on clarity, accuracy, and operational usefulness — adds a layer of validation that purely computational papers cannot provide. This is particularly important for safety-critical applications.
Do not overclaim on regulatory compliance
Stating that LLMIP 'satisfies NERC requirements' without a legal or regulatory expert co-author is a claim reviewers will challenge. Frame it as 'designed to support' or 'aligned with the spirit of' explainability requirements. Leave the formal compliance claim for a follow-up collaboration with a domain expert.

12.4 Recommended Experiment Stack

13. Honest Evaluation: Current State and Post-Experiment Trajectory
This section provides a candid, reviewer-level assessment of the paper's current strength and what it becomes after each level of experimental investment. The goal is to set realistic expectations and identify exactly where effort produces the highest return.
13.1 Current State — No Experiments

No top conference accepts ideas alone. The thesis as written is the strongest possible foundation — but it needs results to become a paper.

13.2 After All Experiments — Three Scenarios
The final evaluation depends on what the results actually show. Three realistic scenarios, assessed honestly:

Scenario A — Results Are Clean But Expected
Replicability Score works as designed. LLMIP is competitive with XGBoost on grid data. Performance degrades in the financial stateful domain as predicted. Prompt ablation is stable across variations. Physical consistency check passes.

Scenario B — Replicability Score Reveals Something Surprising
The Replicability Score turns out to predict overfitting before the test set confirms it. Or it correlates strongly with physical plausibility ratings from grid engineers. Or it drops at a specific dataset size threshold that reveals something fundamental about in-context learning limits. The metric has diagnostic value beyond LLMIP itself.

Scenario C — LLMIP Holds Up Surprisingly Well in the Stateful Financial Domain
The Decision Rulebook captures temporal logic and regime conditions better than expected. The Replicability Score remains high even in the memory-bearing financial environment. The LLM is encoding path-dependent reasoning in natural language in ways the community has not previously documented.

13.3 The Master Summary


13.4 The One Thing That Changes Everything
The variable that separates Scenario A from Scenario C is not how hard you work on the experiments — it is what the results actually show. You cannot engineer a surprising result. What you can do is design the experiments carefully enough that if something surprising is there, you will find it.
The Replicability Score behavior across stateless grid data versus stateful financial data is your highest-variance, highest-reward experiment. Run it carefully, across multiple datasets and multiple LLM sizes, and analyze the failure modes in granular detail. If the Score degrades gracefully and interpretably as memory increases, that degradation curve is your paper's most important figure. If it does not degrade — that is your headline result.

LLMIP — From Black Box to White Box, for the Grid
